docs/blog/posts/disadvantages-of-using-lists-in-python.md, before:

---
title: "What are the disadvantages of using lists in Python?"
description: "Learn the limitations of Python lists: performance issues, memory overhead, and when to use alternatives instead."
tags:
  - python
  - lists
  - limitations
date: 2025-10-07
updated: "2025-10-07"
---

# What are the disadvantages of using lists in Python?
<!-- more -->

!!! info "In short"
    Lists are slow for searching—checking `if item in list` walks through every element (O(n)). Inserting or deleting from the middle is also slow because Python has to shift everything. They use more memory than tuples or specialized structures because they over-allocate for growth. Lists aren't thread-safe, can't be dict keys (because they're mutable), and are terrible for numeric computation compared to NumPy arrays. They're general-purpose, which means they're not optimized for any specific use case. When performance matters, reach for specialized tools: sets for lookups, deques for queues, tuples for immutable data.

## Example (runnable)

```python
# Slow lookup (O(n))
<!-- more -->
large_list = list(range(100000))
print(50000 in large_list)  # Checks up to 50000 items

# Slow insertion at start (O(n))
<!-- more -->
items = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
items.insert(0, 0)  # Shifts everything

# Memory overhead
<!-- more -->
import sys
print(f"List: {sys.getsizeof([1,2,3])} bytes")
print(f"Tuple: {sys.getsizeof((1,2,3))} bytes")

# Can't be dict keys
<!-- more -->
try:
    d = {[1, 2]: "value"}
except TypeError as e:
    print(f"Error: {e}")
```

**Expected output:**
```
True
List: 80 bytes
Tuple: 64 bytes
Error: unhashable type: 'list'
```

That 16-byte difference adds up when you're storing millions of small sequences.

## Gotchas

* **Membership testing kills performance** — for big lists, `x in list` is painfully slow. Switch to a set and get 100x+ speedup. Seriously, just use a set if you're checking membership often.
* **Queue operations are wrong** — `list.pop(0)` removes from the front but shifts everything (O(n)). Use `collections.deque` which has O(1) operations at both ends.
* **Memory grows unpredictably** — lists allocate extra capacity. For fixed-size numeric data, `array.array` or NumPy is way more memory-efficient.

## See also

* [[What is the main benefit of using lists in Python?]](./main-benefit-of-using-lists-in-python.md)
* [[Are lists or dictionaries faster in Python?]](./are-lists-or-dictionaries-faster.md)
* External: [https://wiki.python.org/moin/TimeComplexity](https://wiki.python.org/moin/TimeComplexity)

<script type="application/ld+json">
{
  "@context": "https://schema.org",
  "@type": "FAQPage",
  "mainEntity": [{
    "@type": "Question",
    "name": "What are the disadvantages of using lists in Python?",
    "acceptedAnswer": {
      "@type": "Answer",
      "text": "Lists are slow for searching—checking if item in list walks through every element (O(n)). Inserting or deleting from the middle is also slow because Python has to shift everything. They use more memory than tuples or specialized structures because they over-allocate for growth. Lists aren't thread-safe, can't be dict keys (because they're mutable), and are terrible for numeric computation compared to NumPy arrays. They're general-purpose, which means they're not optimized for any specific use case. When performance matters, reach for specialized tools: sets for lookups, deques for queues, tuples for immutable data."
    }
  }]
}
</script>

Commit message:

Refactor Python list documentation for clarity and examples. Updated sections on accessing, iterating, slicing, and using negative indices in lists. Enhanced explanations and removed redundant comments for improved readability.

docs/blog/posts/disadvantages-of-using-lists-in-python.md, after:

---
title: "What are the disadvantages of using lists in Python?"
description: "Learn the limitations of Python lists: performance issues, memory overhead, and when to use alternatives instead."
tags:
  - python
  - lists
  - limitations
date: 2025-10-07
updated: "2025-10-07"
---

# What are the disadvantages of using lists in Python?

<!-- more -->

!!! info "In short"
    Lists are slow for searching—checking `if item in list` walks through every element (O(n)). Inserting or deleting from the middle is also slow because Python has to shift everything. They use more memory than tuples or specialized structures because they over-allocate for growth. Lists aren't thread-safe, can't be dict keys (because they're mutable), and are terrible for numeric computation compared to NumPy arrays. They're general-purpose, which means they're not optimized for any specific use case. When performance matters, reach for specialized tools: sets for lookups, deques for queues, tuples for immutable data.

Let me show you where lists struggle:

```python
# Slow lookup (O(n))
large_list = list(range(100000))
print(50000 in large_list)  # Checks up to 50000 items

# Slow insertion at start (O(n))
items = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
items.insert(0, 0)  # Shifts everything

# Memory overhead
import sys
print(f"List: {sys.getsizeof([1,2,3])} bytes")
print(f"Tuple: {sys.getsizeof((1,2,3))} bytes")

# Can't be dict keys
try:
    d = {[1, 2]: "value"}
except TypeError as e:
    print(f"Error: {e}")
```

Running this code, the lookup returns `True` but only after checking thousands of items. The list uses 80 bytes while the tuple only needs 64. And trying to use a list as a dict key fails with "unhashable type: 'list'".

That 16-byte difference adds up when you're storing millions of small sequences.

## Gotchas

* **Membership testing kills performance** — for big lists, `x in list` is painfully slow. Switch to a set and get 100x+ speedup. Seriously, just use a set if you're checking membership often.
* **Queue operations are wrong** — `list.pop(0)` removes from the front but shifts everything (O(n)). Use `collections.deque` which has O(1) operations at both ends.
* **Memory grows unpredictably** — lists allocate extra capacity. For fixed-size numeric data, `array.array` or NumPy is way more memory-efficient.

## See also

* [[What is the main benefit of using lists in Python?]](./main-benefit-of-using-lists-in-python.md)
* [[Are lists or dictionaries faster in Python?]](./are-lists-or-dictionaries-faster.md)
* External: [https://wiki.python.org/moin/TimeComplexity](https://wiki.python.org/moin/TimeComplexity)

<script type="application/ld+json">
{
  "@context": "https://schema.org",
  "@type": "FAQPage",
  "mainEntity": [{
    "@type": "Question",
    "name": "What are the disadvantages of using lists in Python?",
    "acceptedAnswer": {
      "@type": "Answer",
      "text": "Lists are slow for searching—checking if item in list walks through every element (O(n)). Inserting or deleting from the middle is also slow because Python has to shift everything. They use more memory than tuples or specialized structures because they over-allocate for growth. Lists aren't thread-safe, can't be dict keys (because they're mutable), and are terrible for numeric computation compared to NumPy arrays. They're general-purpose, which means they're not optimized for any specific use case. When performance matters, reach for specialized tools: sets for lookups, deques for queues, tuples for immutable data."
    }
  }]
}
</script>
