docs/blog/posts/when-to-use-python-list.md, before:

---
title: "When should you use a Python list?"
description: "Discover the ideal use cases for Python lists: when they excel and when other data structures are better choices."
tags:
  - python
  - lists
  - use-cases
date: 2025-10-07
updated: "2025-10-07"
---

# When should you use a Python list?
<!-- more -->

!!! info "In short"
    Use a list when you need ordered items that might change, and you're mainly accessing them by position or looping through everything. Collecting results in a loop? List. Processing items one by one? List. Building a stack (append/pop from end)? List. They're your default for "I need to store multiple things in order." But skip lists if you're constantly checking whether items exist (use a set), looking things up by name or ID (use a dict), or the data shouldn't change (use a tuple). When in doubt, start with a list—it's rarely wrong.

## Example (runnable)

```python
# Good use case: collecting results
<!-- more -->
results = []
for i in range(5):
    results.append(i ** 2)
print(results)

# Good: maintaining order
<!-- more -->
queue = ["first", "second", "third"]
current = queue.pop(0)
print(f"Processing: {current}")

# Bad pattern: frequent lookups (use set instead)
<!-- more -->
# if item in huge_list:  # This is slow!

# Better for lookups
<!-- more -->
seen = set()
seen.add("item")
print("item" in seen)  # Fast!
```

**Expected output:**
```
[0, 1, 4, 9, 16]
Processing: first
True
```

See how lists shine for sequential operations but struggle with lookups?

## Gotchas

* **Not for "does it contain X" checks** — running `if x in list` scans every item. For big collections you search frequently, sets are 100x faster.
* **Not your universal storage** — if you're looking up by ID, name, or key, dictionaries are the answer. Lists are for "item 0, item 1, item 2" access patterns.
* **Not for immutable data** — if the data shouldn't change, use a tuple. It signals intent and prevents accidents. Plus tuples can be dict keys; lists can't.

## See also

* [[What is the purpose of using a list in Python?]](./purpose-of-using-list-in-python.md)
* [[When to use list vs tuple vs dictionary vs set in Python?]](./list-vs-tuple-vs-dictionary-vs-set.md)
* External: [https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/datastructures.html](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/datastructures.html)

<script type="application/ld+json">
{
  "@context": "https://schema.org",
  "@type": "FAQPage",
  "mainEntity": [{
    "@type": "Question",
    "name": "When should you use a Python list?",
    "acceptedAnswer": {
      "@type": "Answer",
      "text": "Use a list when you need ordered items that might change, and you're mainly accessing them by position or looping through everything. Collecting results in a loop? List. Processing items one by one? List. Building a stack (append/pop from end)? List. They're your default for I need to store multiple things in order. But skip lists if you're constantly checking whether items exist (use a set), looking things up by name or ID (use a dict), or the data shouldn't change (use a tuple). When in doubt, start with a list—it's rarely wrong."
    }
  }]
}
</script>

Commit message:

Refactor Python list documentation for clarity and examples. Updated sections on accessing, iterating, slicing, and using negative indices in lists. Enhanced explanations and removed redundant comments for improved readability.

docs/blog/posts/when-to-use-python-list.md, after:

---
title: "When should you use a Python list?"
description: "Discover the ideal use cases for Python lists: when they excel and when other data structures are better choices."
tags:
  - python
  - lists
  - use-cases
date: 2025-10-07
updated: "2025-10-07"
---

# When should you use a Python list?

<!-- more -->

!!! info "In short"
    Use a list when you need ordered items that might change, and you're mainly accessing them by position or looping through everything. Collecting results in a loop? List. Processing items one by one? List. Building a stack (append/pop from end)? List. They're your default for "I need to store multiple things in order." But skip lists if you're constantly checking whether items exist (use a set), looking things up by name or ID (use a dict), or the data shouldn't change (use a tuple). When in doubt, start with a list—it's rarely wrong.

Here's when lists shine and when they don't:

```python
# Good use case: collecting results
results = []
for i in range(5):
    results.append(i ** 2)
print(results)

# Good: maintaining order
queue = ["first", "second", "third"]
current = queue.pop(0)
print(f"Processing: {current}")

# Bad pattern: frequent lookups (use set instead)
# if item in huge_list:  # This is slow!

# Better for lookups
seen = set()
seen.add("item")
print("item" in seen)  # Fast!
```

In the code above, lists work perfectly for collecting those squares: `[0, 1, 4, 9, 16]`. The queue pattern processes "first" and leaves the rest. But that commented-out lookup? On a big list, it's painfully slow. The set version checks membership instantly.

See how lists shine for sequential operations but struggle with lookups?

## Gotchas

* **Not for "does it contain X" checks** — running `if x in list` scans every item. For big collections you search frequently, sets are 100x faster.
* **Not your universal storage** — if you're looking up by ID, name, or key, dictionaries are the answer. Lists are for "item 0, item 1, item 2" access patterns.
* **Not for immutable data** — if the data shouldn't change, use a tuple. It signals intent and prevents accidents. Plus tuples can be dict keys; lists can't.

## See also

* [[What is the purpose of using a list in Python?]](./purpose-of-using-list-in-python.md)
* [[When to use list vs tuple vs dictionary vs set in Python?]](./list-vs-tuple-vs-dictionary-vs-set.md)
* External: [https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/datastructures.html](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/datastructures.html)

<script type="application/ld+json">
{
  "@context": "https://schema.org",
  "@type": "FAQPage",
  "mainEntity": [{
    "@type": "Question",
    "name": "When should you use a Python list?",
    "acceptedAnswer": {
      "@type": "Answer",
      "text": "Use a list when you need ordered items that might change, and you're mainly accessing them by position or looping through everything. Collecting results in a loop? List. Processing items one by one? List. Building a stack (append/pop from end)? List. They're your default for I need to store multiple things in order. But skip lists if you're constantly checking whether items exist (use a set), looking things up by name or ID (use a dict), or the data shouldn't change (use a tuple). When in doubt, start with a list—it's rarely wrong."
    }
  }]
}
</script>
