docs/disclaimer.md, before:

---
title: Disclaimer
description: Disclaimer
meta:
  - name: robots
    content: index, follow
  - name: Publisher
    content: Subhajit Bhar
---

# Disclaimer
## Information Accuracy

While we strive to provide accurate and up-to-date information on this knowledge base, please note the following:

- **No Guarantees**: The content is provided "as is" without any warranties or guarantees regarding its accuracy, completeness, or reliability.
- **Educational Purpose**: This site serves as a personal knowledge base and educational resource. Information should be verified independently before use in production environments.
- **No Liability**: We assume no responsibility or liability for any errors, omissions, or outcomes resulting from the use of information provided on this site.
- **Third-Party Content**: Links to external resources are provided for convenience and do not constitute endorsement of their content.

## Use at Your Own Risk

Readers are encouraged to:

- Verify information through official documentation and multiple sources
- Test code examples in safe environments before production use
- Consult with qualified professionals for critical implementations

## Updates and Changes

Content may be updated, modified, or removed without notice. We recommend checking publication dates and staying current with official documentation for the technologies discussed.

---

*Last updated: January 2025*

Commit message:

Update disclaimer and add privacy policy documentation. Enhanced disclaimer with clearer language on guarantees and added a new privacy policy outlining data collection practices, cookies, and user consent for analytics and advertising.

docs/disclaimer.md, after:

---
title: Disclaimer
description: Disclaimer
meta:
  - name: robots
    content: index, follow
  - name: Publisher
    content: Subhajit Bhar
---

# Disclaimer
## Information Accuracy

While we strive to provide accurate and up-to-date information on this knowledge base, please note the following:

- **No Guarantees**: All information is provided "as is" without warranties of any kind, including accuracy, completeness, reliability, or suitability for a particular purpose.
- **Educational Purpose**: This site serves as a personal knowledge base and educational resource. Information should be verified independently before use in production environments.
- **No Liability**: We assume no responsibility or liability for any errors, omissions, or outcomes resulting from the use of information provided on this site.
- **Third-Party Content**: Links to external resources are provided for convenience and do not constitute endorsement of their content.

## Affiliations and Advertising

This site displays advertisements through Google AdSense and may include links to third-party websites. Ads are automatically served based on visitor interests and content context. Their presence does not imply endorsement or guarantee of any product, service, or claim made by advertisers.

## Use at Your Own Risk

The use of any code, methods, or recommendations from this site is entirely at your own discretion and risk.

Readers are encouraged to:

- Verify information through official documentation and multiple sources
- Test code examples in safe environments before production use
- Consult with qualified professionals for critical implementations

## Updates and Changes

Content may be updated, modified, or removed without notice. We recommend checking publication dates and staying current with official documentation for the technologies discussed.

---

*Last reviewed and updated: November 2025*
